  Hamlet, son to the former, and nephew to the present king.
  Getrude, Queen of Denmark, mother to Hamlet.
  Lords, ladies, Officers, Soldiers, Sailors, Messengers, Attendants.
Enter two Sentinels-[first,] Francisco, [who paces up and down
  Mar. O, farewell, honest soldier.
  Ber. Welcome, Horatio. Welcome, good Marcellus.
    That, if again this apparition come,
  Hor. Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.
  Hor. Well, sit we down,
    Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,
    So frown'd he once when, in an angry parle,
  Mar. Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
    But, in the gross and scope of my opinion,
  Mar. Good now, sit down, and tell me he that knows,
    At least, the whisper goes so. Our last king,
    Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,
    Did slay this Fortinbras; who, by a seal'd compact,
    Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
    Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same comart
    His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,
    Hath in the skirts of Norway, here and there,
    So by his father lost; and this, I take it,
    As stars with trains of fire, and dews of blood,
    If thou hast any sound, or use of voice,
    That may to thee do ease, and, race to me,
    (For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death),
    Speak of it! Stay, and speak!- Stop it, Marcellus!
    We do it wrong, being so majestical,
    For it is as the air, invulnerable,
    The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
    Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
    And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,
    The nights are wholesome, then no planets strike,
    No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
    But look, the morn, in russet mantle clad,
    Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,
    This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
Flourish. [Enter Claudius, King of Denmark, Gertrude the Queen, Hamlet,
Polonius, Laertes and his sister Ophelia, [Voltemand, Cornelius,]
    Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,
    Have we, as 'twere with a defeated joy,
    With an auspicious, and a dropping eye,
    With mirth in funeral, and with dirge in marriage,
    Now follows, that you know, young Fortinbras,
    Lost by his father, with all bands of law,
    To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,
    Who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears
    His further gait herein, in that the levies,
    You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand,
  Cor., Volt. In that, and all things, will we show our duty.
    And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?
    And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg, Laertes,
    Yet now I must confess, that duty done,
  Pol. He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave
  King. Take thy fair hour, Laertes. Time be thine,
    But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son-
  Queen. Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off,
  Ham. Ay, madam, it is common.
  Ham. Seems, madam, Nay, it is. I know not 'seems.'
    'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
    No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
    Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,
  King. 'Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet,
    That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
    A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,
    A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,
    Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
    Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.
    How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable
    But two months dead! Nay, not so much, not two.
    Like Niobe, all tears- why she, even she
    She married. O, most wicked speed, to post
          Enter Horatio, Marcellus, and Bernardo.
  Hor. The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.
    But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?
  Hor. Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.
  Ham. Thrift, thrift, Horatio! The funeral bak'd meats
  Hor. O, where, my lord?
    Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pe,
    Where, as they had deliver'd, both in time,
    Form of the thing, each word made true and good,
  Hor. As I do live, my honour'd lord, 'tis true;  
  Ham. Indeed, indeed, sirs. But this troubles me.
  Hor. O, yes, my lord! He wore his beaver up.
  Hor. It was, as I have seen it in his life,
    Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,
    Till then sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise,
    And, sister, as the winds give benefit
    And convoy is assistant, do not sleep,
  Laer. For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favour,
    Forward, not permanent- sweet, not lasting;
    He may not, as unvalued persons do,
    Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister,
    As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,
    Whiles, like a puff'd and reckless libertine,
  Pol. Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!
    Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
    And it must follow, as the night the day,
  Laer. Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well
  Pol. What is't, Ophelia, he hath said to you?
  Oph. He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
  Oph. I do not know, my lord, what I should think,
  Pol. Ay, fashion you may call it. Go to, go to!
  Oph. And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,
  Pol. Ay, springes to catch woodcocks! I do know,
    Lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,
    Even in their promise, as it is a-making,
    Believe so much in him, that he is young,
    Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia,
    I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth
Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus.
    Keeps wassail, and the swagg'ring upspring reels,
    And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,
  Ham. Ay, marry, is't;
    From our achievements, though perform'd at height,
    That, for some vicious mole of nature in them,
    As in their birth,- wherein they are not guilty,
    Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,
    Being nature's livery, or fortune's star,
  Hor. Look, my lord, it comes!
    King, father, royal Dane. O, answer me?
    Why thy canoniz'd bones, hearsed in death,
    That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,
    And for my soul, what can it do to that,
  Hor. What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord,
    Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
    Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres,
    To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O, list!
    But this most foul, strange, and unnatural.
  Ham. Haste me to know't, that I, with wings as swift
    Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear.
    'Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,
    Rankly abus'd. But know, thou noble youth,
  Ghost. Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,
    O Hamlet, what a falling-off was there,
    But virtue, as it never will be mov'd,
    So lust, though to a radiant angel link'd,
    And curd, like eager droppings into milk,
    Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand
    Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch'd;
    Unhous'led, disappointed, unanel'd,
  Ham. O, horrible! O, horrible! most horrible!
    But, howsoever thou pursuest this act,
    Adieu, adieu, adieu! Remember me.                      Exit.  
    And shall I couple hell? Hold, hold, my heart!
    And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,
    Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seat
    All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past
    O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!
    That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain;
    So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word:
  Mar. Illo, ho, ho, my lord!
  Ham. Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come.
  Hor. Not I, my lord, by heaven!
  Both. Ay, by heaven, my lord.  
  Hor. There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
    And so, without more circumstance at all,
    You, as your business and desires shall point you,
    Yes, faith, heartily.
  Ham. Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,
    O'ermaster't as you may. And now, good friends,  
    As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
  Mar. We have sworn, my lord, already.
  Ham. Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.
  Ham. Aha boy, say'st thou so? Art thou there, truepenny?
    Come hither, gentlemen,
    There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
    Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,
    That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,
    With arms encumb'red thus, or this head-shake,
    As 'Well, well, we know,' or 'We could, an if we would,'
    Or 'If we list to speak,' or 'There be, an if they might,'
  Ham. Rest, rest, perturbed spirit! So, gentlemen,
    Nay, come, let's go together.  
  Pol. You shall do marvell's wisely, good Reynaldo,
  Pol. Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,
    And how, and who, what means, and where they keep,
    Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him;
    As thus, 'I know his father and his friends,
  Rey. Ay, very well, my lord.  
  Pol. 'And in part him, but,' you may say, 'not well.
    But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips
  Pol. Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, quarrelling,
  Pol. Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.
  Rey. Ay, my lord,
  Pol. Marry, sir, here's my drift,
    Your party in converse, him you would sound,
    'Good sir,' or so, or 'friend,' or 'gentleman'-
  Pol. And then, sir, does 'a this- 'a does- What was I about to say?
  Rey. At 'closes in the consequence,' at 'friend or so,' and  
    I saw him yesterday, or t'other day,
    Or then, or then, with such or such; and, as you say,
    Videlicet, a brothel, or so forth.
    So, by my former lecture and advice,
  Oph. O my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!
  Oph. My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,
    Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbrac'd,
    No hat upon his head, his stockings foul'd,
    Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
  Oph. My lord, I do not know,
    And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,
    At last, a little shaking of mine arm,
    And end his being. That done, he lets me go,
  Oph. No, my good lord; but, as you did command,
    This must be known; which, being kept close, might move
Flourish. [Enter King and Queen, Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, cum aliis.
    That, being of so young clays brought up with him,
    That, open'd, lies within our remedy.
  Queen. Good gentlemen, he hath much talk'd of you,
    Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
    And here give up ourselves, in the full bent,
    My too much changed son.- Go, some of you,
  Pol. Th' ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,
  Pol. Have I, my lord? Assure you, my good liege,
    He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found
              Enter Polonius, Voltemand, and Cornelius.
    Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?
    That so his sickness, age, and impotence
    On Fortinbras; which he, in brief, obeys,
    Receives rebuke from Norway, and, in fine,
    Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,
    With an entreaty, herein further shown,
    My liege, and madam, to expostulate
    What majesty should be, what duty is,
    Why day is day, night is night, and time is time.
    Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.
    Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
    Mad call I it; for, to define true madness,
    Or rather say, the cause of this defect,
    Who in her duty and obedience, mark,
    'To the celestial, and my soul's idol, the most beautified
    'In her excellent white bosom, these, &c.'
    reckon my groans; but that I love thee best, O most best, believe
      'Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst this machine is to him,
    This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me;
    And more above, hath his solicitings,
    As they fell out by time, by means, and place,
    (As I perceiv'd it, I must tell you that,
    Before my daughter told me), what might you,
    Or my dear Majesty your queen here, think,
    Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
    Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,
    And he, repulsed, a short tale to make,
    Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
    Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
    Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
  Pol. Away, I do beseech you, both away
  Ham. Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to be one man
  Ham. Words, words, words.
  Pol. I mean, the matter that you read, my lord.
    plentiful lack of wit, together with most weak hams. All which,
    sir, though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet I hold it
    not honesty to have it thus set down; for you yourself, sir,
    should be old as I am if, like a crab, you could go backward.  
  Ham. You cannot, sir, take from me anything that I will more
    willingly part withal- except my life, except my life, except my
  Ham. My excellent good friends! How dost thou, Guildenstern? Ah,
  Ros. None, my lord, but that the world's grown honest.
    question more in particular. What have you, my good friends,
  Ham. A goodly one; in which there are many confines, wards, and
    servants; for, to speak to you like an honest man, I am most
    and sure, dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny. Were
    visitation? Come, deal justly with me. Come, come! Nay, speak.
    of our fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the
  Ham. [aside] Nay then, I have an eye of you.- If you love me, hold
    mirth, forgone all custom of exercises; and indeed, it goes so
    heavily with my disposition that this goodly frame, the earth,
    air, look you, this brave o'erhanging firmament, this majestical
  Ros. To think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what lenten
  Ros. Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace; but there is,
    sir, an eyrie of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top
  Ros. Ay, that they do, my lord- Hercules and his load too.
    twenty, forty, fifty, a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in
    little. 'Sblood, there is something in this more than natural, if
  Ham. Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore. Your hands, come! Th'
  Pol. The best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy,
    history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral,
    individable, or poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
  Ham. O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure hadst thou!
         'One fair daughter, and no more,
  Pol. If you call me Jephthah, my lord, I have a daughter that I
           'As by lot, God wot,'
 and then, you know,
    You are welcome, masters; welcome, all.- I am glad to see thee
    well.- Welcome, good friends.- O, my old friend? Why, thy face is
    Denmark?- What, my young lady and mistress? By'r Lady, your
    uncurrent gold, be not crack'd within the ring.- Masters, you are
    or if it was, not above once; for the play, I remember, pleas'd  
    receiv'd it, and others, whose judgments in such matters cried in
    the top of mine) an excellent play, well digested in the scenes,
    your memory, begin at this line- let me see, let me see:
         'The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,
         With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
  Pol. Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good
      Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
      So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood,
      And, like a neutral to his will and matter,
      But, as we often see, against some storm,
      A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
      Doth rend the region; so, after Pyrrhus' pause,
      On Mars's armour, forg'd for proof eterne,
      Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods,  
  1. Play. 'But who, O who, had seen the mobled queen-'
      Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
  Pol. Look, whe'r he has not turn'd his colour, and has tears in's
  Ham. God's bodykins, man, much better! Use every man after his
  Ham. We'll ha't to-morrow night. You could, for a need, study a
  Ham. Ay, so, God b' wi' ye!
    But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
    That, from her working, all his visage wann'd,
    Tears in his eyes, distraction in's aspect,
    What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
    Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,  
    And can say nothing! No, not for a king,
    Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain!
    Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,
    That I, the son of a dear father murther'd,
    Fie upon't! foh! About, my brain! Hum, I have heard
    That guilty creatures, sitting at a play,
    For murther, though it have no tongue, will speak
Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and Lords.
    And, as I think, they have already order
    That he, as 'twere by accident, may here
    Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,
    And gather by him, as he is behav'd,
    If't be th' affliction of his love, or no,
    And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish
  Pol. Ophelia, walk you here.- Gracious, so please you,
    The harlot's cheek, beautied with plast'ring art,
    Th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
    The pangs of despis'd love, the law's delay,
  Ham. I humbly thank you; well, well, well.
  Oph. My honour'd lord, you know right well you did,
  Oph. Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than with honesty?
  Oph. Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.
    I am very proud, revengeful, ambitious; with more offences at my
  Oph. O, help him, you sweet heavens!
    be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou shalt not escape
    given you one face, and you make yourselves another. You jig, you
    The courtier's, scholar's, soldier's, eye, tongue, sword,
    And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,
    Nor what he spake, though it lack'd form a little,
    Haply the seas, and countries different,
  Ham. Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounc'd it to you,
    not saw the air too much with your hand, thus, but use all
    gently; for in the very torrent, tempest, and (as I may say)
    tatters, to very rags, to split the cars of the groundlings, who
    whose end, both at the first and now, was and is, to hold, as
    'twere, the mirror up to nature; to show Virtue her own feature,
    form and pressure. Now this overdone, or come tardy off, though
    have seen play, and heard others praise, and that highly (not to
    speak it profanely), that, neither having the accent of
    Christians, nor the gait of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so
    journeymen had made men, and not made them well, they imitated
            Enter Polonius, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.
  Ham. What, ho, Horatio!
  Hor. Here, sweet lord, at your service.
    No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp,
    As one, in suff'ring all, that suffers nothing;
    In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,
    I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,
    march. [Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosencrantz,
      Guildenstern, and other Lords attendant, with the Guard
  Ham. Excellent, i' faith; of the chameleon's dish. I eat the air,
  Ham. No, nor mine now. [To Polonius] My lord, you play'd once
  Pol. That did I, my lord, and was accounted a good actor.
  Queen. Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.
  Ham. So long? Nay then, let the devil wear black, for I'll have a
    half a year. But, by'r Lady, he must build churches then; or else
    shall he suffer not thinking on, with the hobby-horse, whose  
    epitaph is 'For O, for O, the hobby-horse is forgot!'
    him asleep, leaves him. Anon comes in a fellow, takes off his
    crown, kisses it, pours poison in the sleeper's ears, and
    leaves him. The Queen returns, finds the King dead, and makes
    Pro. For us, and for our tragedy,
      Since love our hearts, and Hymen did our hands,
      That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,
      Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must;
    King. Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too;  
      Honour'd, belov'd, and haply one as kind
      Which now, like fruit unripe, sticks on the tree,  
      Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.
      The great man down, you mark his favourite flies,
      But, orderly to end where I begun,  
    Queen. Nor earth to me give food, nor heaven light,
      Meet what I would have well, and it destroy,
      If, once a widow, ever I be wife!
  Ham. No, no! They do but jest, poison in jest; no offence i' th'
  Oph. You are keen, my lord, you are keen.
  Ham. So you must take your husbands.- Begin, murtherer. Pox, leave
    thy damnable faces, and begin! Come, the croaking raven doth
    Luc. Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing;
      Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
      With Hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
  All. Lights, lights, lights!
  Ham.   Why, let the strucken deer go weep,
    Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers- if the rest of my
    shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players, sir?
         For thou dost know, O Damon dear,
  Ham.   Aha! Come, some music! Come, the recorders!
         Why then, belike he likes it not, perdy.
  Ham. Ay, sir, what of him?
  Guil. Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame, and start
  Guil. The Queen, your mother, in most great affliction of spirit
  Guil. Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right breed.
  Ham. Make you a wholesome answer; my wit's diseas'd. But, sir, such
    answer is I can make, you shall command; or rather, as you say,
    my mother. Therefore no more, but to the matter! My mother, you  
  Ham. Ay, sir, but 'while the grass grows'- the proverb is something
  Guil. O my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too unmannerly.
  Guil. I know, no touch of it, my lord.
    fingers and thumbs, give it breath with your mouth, and it will
  Ham. Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me! You
    excellent voice, in this little organ, yet cannot you make it
    pipe? Call me what instrument you will, though you can fret me,
  Pol. My lord, the Queen would speak with you, and presently.
    To give them seals never, my soul, consent!             Exit.
Enter King, Rosencrantz, and Guildenstern.
    Each small annexment, petty consequence,
  King. Arm you, I pray you, to th', speedy voyage;
    And, as you said, and wisely was it said,
    The speech, of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.
    O, my offence is rank, it smells to heaven;
    And, like a man to double business bound,
    My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer
    My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.
    In his true nature, and we ourselves compell'd,
    O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,
    Bow, stubborn knees; and heart with strings of steel,
    I, his sole son, do this same villain send
    Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge!
    He took my father grossly, full of bread,
    Up, sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.
    At gaming, swearing, or about some act
    Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
  Ham. (within) Mother, mother, mother!
  Ham. Now, mother, what's the matter?
  Queen. Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
  Ham. Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.
  Queen. Why, how now, Hamlet?  
  Ham. No, by the rood, not so!
    You are the Queen, your husband's brother's wife,
  Ham. Come, come, and sit you down. You shall not budge I
    Help, help, ho!
  Pol. [behind] What, ho! help, help, help!
  Ham. A bloody deed- almost as bad, good mother,
  Ham. Ay, lady, it was my word.
    Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell!
    Yea, this solidity and compound mass,
    With tristful visage, as against the doom,
  Queen. Ay me, what act,
  Ham. Look here upon th's picture, and on this,
    The heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble,
    Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
    Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
    That, laps'd in time and passion, lets go by
  Queen. Alas, how is't with you,  
    And, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,
    Your bedded hairs, like life in excrements,
    His form and cause conjoin'd, preaching to stones,
    Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
    Whiles rank corruption, mining all within,
  Ham. O, throw away the worser part of it,
    That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat
    Of habits evil, is angel yet in this,
    To punish me with this, and this with me,
  Ham. Not this, by no means, that I bid you do:
    And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses,
    For who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
    Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib
    No, in despite of sense and secrecy,
    Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,
  Queen. Be thou assur'd, if words be made of breath,
    Mother, good night.- Indeed, this counsellor
    Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
    Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.
    Ah, mine own lord, what have I seen to-night!
    Whips out his rapier, cries 'A rat, a rat!'
    To you yourself, to us, to every one.  
    Should have kept short, restrain'd, and out of haunt
    But, like the owner of a foul disease,
    Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends
  Ros. What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?
  Ham. That I can keep your counsel, and not mine own. Besides, to be
  Ham. Ay, sir; that soaks up the King's countenance, his rewards,  
    the end. He keeps them, like an ape, in the corner of his jaw;
    glean'd, it is but squeezing you and, sponge, you shall be dry
    And where 'tis so, th' offender's scourge is weigh'd,
  Ros. Where the dead body is bestow'd, my lord,
  Ros. Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.
  King. Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius?
    there, seek him i' th' other place yourself. But indeed, if you
  King. Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety,-
    one flesh; and so, my mother. Come, for England!
    And, England, if my love thou hold'st at aught,-
    Our sovereign process, which imports at full,
  For. Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king.
       Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, [Guildenstern,] and others.
  Ham. How purpos'd, sir, I pray you?
  Ham. Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,
  Capt. Truly to speak, and with no addition,
    To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it;
    A thought which, quarter'd, hath but one part wisdom
    Sith I have cause, and will, and strength, and means
    Whose spirit, with divine ambition puff'd,
    To all that fortune, death, and danger dare,
    That have a father klll'd, a mother stain'd,
    To hide the slain? O, from this time forth,
Enter Horatio, Queen, and a Gentleman.
    There's tricks i' th' world, and hems, and beats her heart;
    Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield them,
  Queen. Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?
    (Sings) He is dead and gone, lady,  
  Queen. Alas, look here, my lord!
    Lord, we know what we are, but know not what we may be. God be at
  Oph. Indeed, la, without an oath, I'll make an end on't!
            Quoth she, 'Before you tumbled me,
            'So would I 'a' done, by yonder sun,
    counsel. Come, my coach! Good night, ladies. Good night, sweet
    All from her father's death. O Gertrude, Gertrude,
    Next, Your son gone, and he most violent author
    Last, and as such containing as all these,
    Feeds on his wonder, keep, himself in clouds,
    Wherein necessity, of matter beggar'd,
    In ear and ear. O my dear Gertrude, this,
    The ocean, overpeering of his list,
    Than Young Laertes, in a riotous head,
    And, as the world were now but to begin,
    Antiquity forgot, custom not known,
    Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,
    O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!
  King. What is the cause, Laertes,
    Acts little of his will. Tell me, Laertes,
    To hell, allegiance! vows, to the blackest devil
    That both the world, I give to negligence,
    And, like the kind life-rend'ring pelican,
    Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!
    Nature is fine in love, and where 'tis fine,
           (Hey non nony, nony, hey nony)
  Laer. Hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade revenge,
  Oph. You must sing 'A-down a-down, and you call him a-down-a.' O,
  Oph. There's rosemary, that's for remembrance. Pray you, love,
  Oph. There's fennel for you, and columbines. There's rue for you,
  Laer. Thought and affliction, passion, hell itself,
           No, no, he is dead;  
           He is gone, he is gone,
    And of all Christian souls, I pray God. God b' wi', you.
  King. Laertes, I must commune with your grief,
    They find us touch'd, we will our kingdom give,
    Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours,
    No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,
    Cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,
  Sailor. 'A shall, sir, an't please him. There's a letter for you,
    slow of sail, we put on a compelled valour, and in the grapple I
    Come, I will give you way for these your letters,
    Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
    As by your safety, wisdom, all things else,
  King. O, for two special reasons,
    Which may to you, perhaps, seein much unsinew'd,
    My virtue or my plague, be it either which,-
    That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,  
    Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
    Would, like the spring that turneth wood to stone,
    Whose worth, if praises may go back again,
    I lov'd your father, and we love ourself,
    And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine-  
  Mess. Letters, my lord, from Hamlet:
  Mess. Sailors, my lord, they say; I saw them not.
    As did that one; and that, in my regard,
    I have seen myself, and serv'd against, the French,
    That I, in forgery of shapes and tricks,
    He swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
    And that I see, in passages of proof,
    For goodness, growing to a plurisy,
    As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;
    Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,
    And wager on your heads. He, being remiss,
    Most generous, and free from all contriving,
    A sword unbated, and, in a pass of practice,
    So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,
    With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,
    Our purpose may hold there.- But stay, what noise,
    Of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,
    Clamb'ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,  
    And, mermaid-like, awhile they bore her up;
    Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
  Laer. Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,
    act hath three branches-it is to act, to do, and to perform;
  Other. Nay, but hear you, Goodman Delver!
    man; good. If the man go to this water and drown himself, it is,
    him and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he that is not
  Clown. Ay, marry, is't- crowner's quest law.
    ancient gentlemen but gard'ners, ditchers, and grave-makers. They
    church. Argal, the gallows may do well to thee. To't again, come!
  Other. Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright, or a
  Clown. Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.
       In youth when I did love, did love,
    knave jowls it to the ground,as if 'twere Cain's jawbone, that
  Ham. Or of a courtier, which could say 'Good morrow, sweet lord!
    How dost thou, good lord?' This might be my Lord Such-a-one, that
  Ham. Why, e'en so! and now my Lady Worm's, chapless, and knock'd
         A pickaxe and a spade, a spade,
    Where be his quiddits now, his quillets, his cases, his tenures,
    great buyer of land, with his statutes, his recognizances, his
    fines, his double vouchers, his recoveries. Is this the fine of
    his fines, and the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine
    his purchases, and double ones too, than the length and breadth
  Hor. Ay, my lord, And of calveskins too.
  Clown. You lie out on't, sir, and therefore 'tis not yours.
    For my part, I do not lie in't, yet it is mine.
  Clown. One that was a woman, sir; but, rest her soul, she's dead.
    equivocation will undo us. By the Lord, Horatio, this three years
  Ham. Ay, marry, why was be sent into England?
    or, if 'a do not, 'tis no great matter there.
  Clown. Why, here in Denmark. I have been sexton here, man and boy  
  Clown. Why, sir, his hide is so tann'd with his trade that 'a will
    Rhenish on my head once. This same skull, sir, was Yorick's
  Ham. Let me see. [Takes the skull.] Alas, poor Yorick! I knew him,  
    chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch thick, to this
    favour she must come. Make her laugh at that. Prithee, Horatio,
  Ham. No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither with modesty
    enough, and likelihood to lead it; as thus: Alexander died,
    Imperious Caesar, dead and turn'd to clay,
    Enter [priests with] a coffin [in funeral procession], King,
             Queen, Laertes, with Lords attendant.]
    And, but that great command o'ersways the order,
    Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on her.
    May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,
    I thought thy bride-bed to have deck'd, sweet maid,
    For, though I am not splenitive and rash,
  King. O, he is mad, Laertes.
    Millions of acres on us, till our ground,
    Make Ossa like a wart! Nay, an thou'lt mouth,
  King. I pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.
    (O royal knavery!), an exact command,
    Importing Denmark's health, and England's too,
    That, on the supervise, no leisure bated,
    No, not to stay the finding of the axe,
    I once did hold it, as our statists do,
    How to forget that learning; but, sir, now  
    That, on the view and knowing of these contents,
    Without debatement further, more or less,
    Subscrib'd it, gave't th' impression, plac'd it safely,
  Ham. Why, man, they did make love to this employment!
  Ham. Does it not, thinks't thee, stand me now upon-
    But I am very sorry, good Horatio,
    a chough; but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.  
  Osr. Sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, I should impart
  Ham. I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of spirit. Put your
  Ham. No, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind is northerly.
  Osr. It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.
  Osr. Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as 'twere- I cannot
    tell how. But, my lord, his Majesty bade me signify to you that
  Osr. Nay, good my lord; for mine ease, in good faith. Sir, here is
    newly come to court Laertes; believe me, an absolute gentleman,
    great showing. Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card
  Ham. Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in you; though, I  
    But, in the verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of great
    article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness as, to make
    true diction of him, his semblable is his mirror, and who else
    would trace him, his umbrage, nothing more.
    tongue? You will do't, sir, really.
  Ham. I would you did, sir; yet, in faith, if you did, it would not
  Osr. I mean, sir, for his weapon; but in the imputation laid on him
  Osr. The King, sir, hath wager'd with him six Barbary horses;
    against the which he has impon'd, as I take it, six French
    rapiers and poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and
    so. Three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy,
    very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of
  Osr. The carriages, sir, are the hangers.
  Osr. The King, sir, hath laid that, in a dozen passes between
  Osr. I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial.
  Ham. Sir, I will walk here in the hall. If it please his Majesty,
    brought, the gentleman willing, and the King hold his purpose,
  Ham. To this effect, sir, after what flourish your nature will.
  Lord. My lord, his Majesty commended him to you by young Osric, who
    If his fitness speaks, mine is ready; now or whensoever, provided
    the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, 'tis not to come', if it be
    not to come, it will be now; if it be not now, yet it will come:
    Enter King, Queen, Laertes, Osric, and Lords, with other
  King. Come, Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me.
    That might your nature, honour, and exception
    Who does it, then? His madness. If't be so,
    Sir, in this audience,
    Your skill shall, like a star i' th' darkest night,
  King. Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,
    The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,
  King. Stay, give me drink. Hamlet, this pearl is thine;
    Here, Hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows.  
  Laer. Why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric.
  Queen. No, no! the drink, the drink! O my dear Hamlet!
  Laer. It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain;
    Hath turn'd itself on me. Lo, here I lie,
    Then, venom, to thy work.                    Hurts the King.
  King. O, yet defend me, friends! I am but hurt.
  Ham. Here, thou incestuous, murd'rous, damned Dane,
    I am dead, Horatio. Wretched queen, adieu!
    Had I but time (as this fell sergeant, Death,
  Osr. Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,
  Ham. O, I die, Horatio!
    So tell him, with th' occurrents, more and less,
  Hor. Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,
    Enter Fortinbras and English Ambassadors, with Drum,
    But since, so jump upon this bloody question,
    You from the Polack wars, and you from England,
    And, in this upshot, purposes mistook
    For he was likely, had he been put on,
